# History of the MBTA
The history of the [Massachusetts Bay Transportation
Authority](Massachusetts_Bay_Transportation_Authority "wikilink") (MBTA)
and its predecessors spans two centuries, starting with one of the
oldest railroads in the United States. Development of mass
transportation both followed existing economic and population patterns,
and helped shape those patterns.

Privately owned mass transit in the Boston area evolved from the
colonial period into the early 1900s, including ferries, steamships,
steam commuter railroads, horse and electric streetcars, elevated
railways, and subways. Many streetcar lines were consolidated into the
[West End Street Railway](West_End_Street_Railway "wikilink") in 1887.
This was merged into the [Boston Elevated
Railway](Boston_Elevated_Railway "wikilink") in 1897, which that same
year opened the first subway in the United States (the [Tremont Street
subway](Tremont_Street_subway "wikilink")). Subway construction was
funded by city taxpayers, and overseen by the new Boston Transit
Commission. As automobiles started causing financial problems for mass
transit operators, the MTA took over the BER in 1947 and began replacing
inner commuter rail service with rapid transit expansions. The MTA
started running ferry services in 1963. The MBTA replaced the MTA in
1964, expanding the service area to fully include the area's commuter
rail services, all of which had to be taken over by the government or
discontinued for financial reasons. [Paratransit
services](The_Ride_(MBTA) "wikilink") began in 1977.

Except for the [Mattapan Trolley](Mattapan_Trolley "wikilink") and some
portions of the [Green Line](Green_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink"), all
streetcars were replaced by buses. The MBTA benefitted from a political
turn away from highway construction in the 1970s, which resulted in
relocation of part of the Orange Line. In the following decades, demand
for mass transit services increased as the population migration out of
the urban core toward the car-centric suburbs reversed, and overall
population kept increasing.

The agency continued expanding and reactivating commuter rail services,
and expanding rapid transit into the late 20th and early 21st century.
The [Big Dig](Big_Dig "wikilink") (1991-2006) resulted in the creation
of the Silver Line subway-busline and other promised expansions to
mitigate the increased pollution caused by increased highway capacity
(required after a [Clean Air
Act](Clean_Air_Act_(United_States) "wikilink") lawsuit by the
[Conservation Law Foundation](Conservation_Law_Foundation "wikilink")).
In 2000, the state changed the MBTA financing mechanism from habitually
paying expenses in arrears to getting a fixed budget: 1% of state retail
sales (out of a total 5% statewide sales tax at the time) plus
assessments from cities and towns in the service area. Partly due to an
increase in [ecommerce](ecommerce "wikilink"), sales tax revenues were
lower than expected, and because debt service for the Big Dig transit
projects had been allocated to the MBTA, the agency experienced
financial problems that required occasional supplemental state funding.
It became a division of the newly consolidated
[MassDOT](MassDOT "wikilink") in 2009. During the term of Governor
[Charlie Baker](Charlie_Baker "wikilink") (2015-2023), deferred subway
system maintenance from the period of austerity became problematic. A
2015 snowstorm shut down two subway lines, resulting in temporary
appointment of a Fiscal and Management Control Board. During the
recovery from the [COVID-19 pandemic](COVID-19_pandemic "wikilink"), an
accumulation of high-profile safety incidents resulted in a [Federal
Transit Administration](Federal_Transit_Administration "wikilink")
investigation in 2022, and sudden safety-related service cuts.

## Early mass transit

Mass transit in [Boston](Boston "wikilink"),
[Massachusetts](Massachusetts "wikilink") began as a family-owned and
operated ferry about the [time of the
founding](Boston#Colonial "wikilink") of Boston, in around 1630.
Ground transportation started in Boston with a private stagecoach
operation in 1793.

## Steam intercity railroads

The [steam locomotive](steam_locomotive "wikilink") became practical for
mass transportation in the 1810s and came to the United States in the
1820s. The private [Boston and Lowell
Railroad](Boston_and_Lowell_Railroad "wikilink") was chartered in 1830,
connecting Boston to [Lowell](Lowell,_Massachusetts "wikilink"), a major
northerly mill town (which was also connected via the [Middlesex
Canal](Middlesex_Canal "wikilink")). It was one of the [oldest railroads
in North America](oldest_railroads_in_North_America "wikilink") and the
first major one in Massachusetts. This route marked the beginning of the
development of intercity railroads that eventually evolved into the MBTA
Commuter Rail system and the Riverside [Green Line D
branch](Green_Line_D_branch "wikilink"). Origins of the various rail
lines are listed below:

Steam railroads also proved stiff competition for slower steamships,
which gradually declined.

### Boston and Maine Railroad

The **[Haverhill Line](Haverhill_Line "wikilink")** was originally
chartered as the [Andover and Wilmington
Railroad](Andover_and_Wilmington_Railroad "wikilink") in 1833 and
extended to [Haverhill](Haverhill,_Massachusetts "wikilink") in 1837 as
the [Andover and Haverhill
Railroad](Andover_and_Haverhill_Railroad "wikilink"). The line became
the Boston & Maine's first acquisition, as the result of a consolidation
of three railroads between Boston and [Portland,
Maine](Portland,_Maine "wikilink").

**[Lowell Line](Lowell_Line "wikilink")** — [Boston and Lowell
Railroad](Boston_and_Lowell_Railroad "wikilink"), chartered in 1830

**[Fitchburg Line](Fitchburg_Railroad "wikilink")** — [Fitchburg
Railroad](Fitchburg_Railroad "wikilink"), chartered in 1842

The **[Newburyport/Rockport
Line](Newburyport/Rockport_Line "wikilink")** was originally chartered
as the [Eastern Railroad](Eastern_Railroad_(Massachusetts) "wikilink")
in 1836. The line first opened between
[Salem](Salem,_Massachusetts "wikilink") and [East
Boston](East_Boston "wikilink") in 1838. The railroad expanded until
it was running from Portland, Maine to Boston, putting the line in
direct competition with the Boston & Maine. In 1884, the Eastern
Railroad was leased by the Boston & Maine, ending the competition and
leading to an outright purchase in 1900.

### Penn Central

The [Penn Central Transportation
Company](Penn_Central_Transportation_Company "wikilink") came into
existence in 1968 when the [New York Central
Railroad](New_York_Central_Railroad "wikilink") merged with the
[Pennsylvania Railroad](Pennsylvania_Railroad "wikilink"), absorbing the
[New York, New Haven and Hartford
Railroad](New_York,_New_Haven_and_Hartford_Railroad "wikilink") at the
beginning of 1969.

#### New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad

-   **[Providence/Stoughton
    Line](Providence/Stoughton_Line "wikilink")** — [Boston and
    Providence Railroad](Boston_and_Providence_Railroad "wikilink"),
    chartered 1831; Stoughton Branch Railroad portion chartered 1841;
    Cranston-Wickford Junction portion opened 1837 by the [New York,
    Providence and Boston
    Railroad](New_York,_Providence_and_Boston_Railroad "wikilink");
    Providence connector opened 1848
-   **[Fairmount Line](Fairmount_Line "wikilink")** — Built in 1855 for
    the [Norfolk County Railroad](Norfolk_County_Railroad "wikilink")
-   **[Needham Line](Needham_Line "wikilink")** — Inner portion opened
    1850 as a branch of the [Boston and Providence
    Railroad](Boston_and_Providence_Railroad "wikilink"), outer portion
    opened 1853 ([Charles River Branch
    Railroad](Charles_River_Branch_Railroad "wikilink")), connecting
    segment opened 1906 by the NYNH&H
-   **[Franklin/Foxboro Line](Franklin/Foxboro_Line "wikilink")** —
    [Norfolk County Railroad](Norfolk_County_Railroad "wikilink"),
    opened 1849; later acquired by [New York and New England
    Railroad](New_York_and_New_England_Railroad "wikilink")

#### New York Central Railroad

-   **[Framingham/Worcester
    Line](Framingham/Worcester_Line "wikilink")** — [Boston and
    Worcester Railroad](Boston_and_Worcester_Railroad "wikilink"),
    chartered 1831

### Old Colony Lines

Acquired by the large [Old Colony
Railroad](Old_Colony_Railroad "wikilink"), much of which was since
abandoned, and which later merged into the [New York, New Haven and
Hartford Railroad](New_York,_New_Haven_and_Hartford_Railroad "wikilink")
and then the [Penn Central Transportation
Company](Penn_Central_Transportation_Company "wikilink").

-   **[Plymouth/Kingston Line](Old_Colony_Lines_(MBTA) "wikilink")** —
    Original [Old Colony Railroad](Old_Colony_Railroad "wikilink"),
    opened to Plymouth in 1845
-   **[Middleborough/Lakeville
    Line](Old_Colony_Lines_(MBTA) "wikilink")** — Randolph and
    Bridgewater Railroad and Middleborough Railroad — chartered 1845
-   **[Greenbush Line](Greenbush_Line "wikilink")** — [South Shore
    Railroad](South_Shore_Railroad_(Old_Colony_Railroad) "wikilink"),
    chartered 1846
-   [Gillette Stadium](Gillette_Stadium "wikilink") spur of
    Providence/Stoughton Line — [Agricultural Branch
    Railroad](Agricultural_Branch_Railroad "wikilink"), chartered 1847?
    (see [Old Colony Railroad](Old_Colony_Railroad "wikilink");
    eventually purchased by MBTA from [New York, New Haven and Hartford
    Railroad](New_York,_New_Haven_and_Hartford_Railroad "wikilink")

### New York Central Railroad

-   **[Green Line D branch](Green_Line_D_branch "wikilink")** —
    Brookline Branch Railroad, opened 1847; Charles River Branch
    Railroad extended from Brookline Village to Cook Junction in 1852;
    [Boston and Albany Railroad](Boston_and_Albany_Railroad "wikilink")
    extended to Riverside in 1886

The [Grand Junction
Railroad](Grand_Junction_Railroad_and_Depot_Company "wikilink"), built
between 1847 and 1856, was owned by a succession of railroad companies,
culminating in ownership by [CSX
Transportation](CSX_Transportation "wikilink"). In 2010, this trackage,
along with several other portions of CSX-owned track with current or
potential future MBTA service, was purchased by the state for the MBTA.
For years, the MBTA had used it only for non-revenue movement of trains
between [the northern and southern
halves](North–South_Rail_Link "wikilink") of its [commuter
rail](commuter_rail "wikilink") system, but it now has plans to use the
tracks to route some trains from west of Boston into [North
Station](North_Station "wikilink"), to supplement existing routes into
[South Station](South_Station "wikilink"). As of 2012, there is some
community opposition from the city of [Cambridge,
Massachusetts](Cambridge,_Massachusetts "wikilink"), and it is not clear
if or when such service will begin. The Grand Junction trackage
has also been considered for the proposed [Urban Ring
Project](Urban_Ring_Project_(MBTA) "wikilink"), intended to bypass
severe overcrowding in the Downtown Boston rapid transit stations.

## Streetcar era

The [Cambridge Railroad](Cambridge_Railroad "wikilink") was the first
[streetcar](Tram "wikilink") company in Massachusetts. It was chartered
in 1853 to connect the [West End of
Boston](West_End,_Boston,_Massachusetts "wikilink") to [Central
Square](Central_Square_(Cambridge) "wikilink") and [Harvard
Square](Harvard_Square "wikilink") in
[Cambridge](Cambridge,_Massachusetts "wikilink") via the West End
Bridge. (The bridge was replaced by the current [Longfellow
Bridge](Longfellow_Bridge "wikilink") in early August 1906). This is the
same route followed by today's [Red Line](Red_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink")
subway, but on the surface street network. Using horse-drawn streetcars,
the Cambridge Railroad started running on March 26, 1856. Another
streetcar company, the [Dorchester
Railroad](Dorchester_Railroad "wikilink"), was chartered in 1854. Over
20 streetcar lines were laid down throughout the Boston area by these
and other competing companies.

In order to regulate fares and reduce competition, the General Court of
Massachusetts passed the West End Consolidation Act to consolidate the
rail line operations. This created the [West End Street
Railway](West_End_Street_Railway "wikilink") in 1885. The company
consolidated ownership of existing streetcar lines in Boston and the
inner suburbs and began converting the animal-drawn vehicles to electric
propulsion. The first electric trolleys ran in 1889, and the last
[horsecar](horsecar "wikilink") went out of service around 1900.

In the late 19th century and early 20th century, two other streetcar
companies gained consolidated ownership of many smaller lines. The
[Middlesex and Boston Street
Railway](Middlesex_and_Boston_Street_Railway "wikilink") came to control
the western suburbs, and the [Eastern Massachusetts Street
Railway](Eastern_Massachusetts_Street_Railway "wikilink") came to
control the northern and southern suburbs.

## Streetcar subways and elevated rail

Severe streetcar congestion on streets in downtown Boston created the
need for [subways](Rapid_transit "wikilink") and elevated rail. These
[grade-separated](Grade_separation "wikilink") railways would add
transportation capacity, and avoid delays caused by intersections with
cross streets and growing congestion in mixed street traffic. The West
End Street Railway was renamed the [Boston Elevated
Railway](Boston_Elevated_Railway "wikilink") (BERy), and undertook
several such projects.

Boston's subway was the first in the [United
States](United_States "wikilink") and is often called "America's First
Subway" by the MBTA and others. In 1897 and 1898, the [Tremont Street
subway](Tremont_Street_subway "wikilink") opened as the core of the
precursor to the [Green Line](Green_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink").

In 1901, the [Main Line Elevated](Orange_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink"), the
precursor to the [Orange Line](Orange_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink") opened. It
was a rapid transit line running as an [elevated
railway](Rapid_transit "wikilink") through outlying areas and using the
Tremont Street subway downtown, with the outer tracks and platforms
reconfigured for Elevated trains. The [Atlantic Avenue
Elevated](Atlantic_Avenue_Elevated "wikilink") opened soon after,
providing a second route through downtown. This was the first elevated
railway and the first rapid transit line in Boston, three years before
the first underground line of the [New York City
Subway](New_York_City_Subway "wikilink"), but some 33 years after [the
first elevated railway in New York.](IRT_Ninth_Avenue_Line "wikilink")

In 1904, the next line to open was the [East Boston
Tunnel](East_Boston_Tunnel "wikilink"), a streetcar tunnel under [Boston
Harbor](Boston_Harbor "wikilink") to [East
Boston](East_Boston,_Massachusetts "wikilink"). This replaced a transfer
between streetcars and [ferries](Ferry "wikilink") and provided access
to the other subways downtown. The tunnel was converted to [rapid
transit](rapid_transit "wikilink") specifications in 1924, with an easy
cross-platform streetcar transfer at the East Boston end. East Boston
ferry continued to run until 1952.

In 1908, the [Washington Street Tunnel](Orange_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink")
opened, giving the Elevated a shorter route through downtown and
returning the older Tremont Street subway to full streetcar service.
Various extensions and branches were built to the Tremont Street subway
in both directions, bypassing more surface tracks. In addition, when the
Main Line El opened in 1901, many surface routes were cut back to its
and terminals to provide a transfer for a faster route downtown. Further
elevated extensions, as with the [Charlestown
Elevated](Charlestown_Elevated "wikilink"), were soon built on each end,
and more streetcar lines were connected.

In 1912, the [Cambridge Tunnel](Cambridge_Tunnel "wikilink") opened,
connecting the Downtown Boston routes to [Harvard
Square](Harvard_Square "wikilink") in
[Cambridge](Cambridge,_Massachusetts "wikilink"). It was soon extended
south from Downtown to
[Dorchester](Dorchester,_Massachusetts "wikilink") as the [Dorchester
Tunnel](Dorchester_Tunnel "wikilink"). The Dorchester Extension, opening
in stages from 1927, took the line further along a former [New York, New
Haven and Hartford
Railroad](New_York,_New_Haven_and_Hartford_Railroad "wikilink") branch
through Dorchester, with the [Ashmont–Mattapan High Speed
Line](Ashmont–Mattapan_High_Speed_Line "wikilink") continuing along the
old right-of-way to [Mattapan](Mattapan,_Massachusetts "wikilink").
This, too, resulted in cutbacks in streetcar service to its terminals.

As built, many of the key rapid transit transfer stations were
[prepayment stations](Paid_area "wikilink"), in which free transfers
could be made between surface streetcar lines and grade-separated subway
or elevated lines. This was made possible by the operation of all
services under one umbrella; some suburban services that operated over
the same streetcar tracks used different areas outside [fare
control](Paid_area "wikilink"). Some of the streetcar levels in transfer
stations were later converted for bus or [trackless
trolley](Trolleybus "wikilink") operation; other such spaces have been
closed. Some of the prepaid transfer areas still exist architecturally,
and faregates enclose all subway stations (but not most above-ground
Green Line stops).

Free in-station transfers were eliminated in October 1961, except among
subway routes at the transfer stations in Downtown Boston. Transfers
between bus and rapid transit were restored, in a limited capacity in
2000, and in full in 2007 as long as a
[CharlieCard](CharlieCard "wikilink") is used. Transfers between bus and
subway are reduced price but not free, while a single transfer between
one local bus and another is free.

Prepayment streetcar stations included rapid transit transfer stations at 
Andrew, Ashmont, Broadway, Dudley, Egleston, Everett, Fields Corner, 
Forest Hills, Harvard, Lechmere, Massachusetts, Maverick, and Sullivan 
Square; surface-streetcar-only stations at Arborway, Kenmore, and 
Watertown Yard. 

## Mid-20th century

### Decline of streetcars and railroads

The Boston Elevated Railway started replacing rail vehicles with buses
in 1922, a process later dubbed
"[bustitution](Rail_replacement_bus_service "wikilink")". The last
Middlesex and Boston Street Railway streetcars ran in 1930. The BERy
started replacing some rail vehicles with trackless trolleys in 1936.

By the beginning of 1953, the only [remaining streetcar
lines](Boston-area_streetcar_lines "wikilink") fed two tunnels — the
main [Tremont Street subway](Tremont_Street_subway "wikilink") network
downtown and the short tunnel (now the [Harvard bus
tunnel](Harvard_bus_tunnel "wikilink")) in [Harvard
Square](Harvard_Square "wikilink"). Diesel-powered buses could not be
used in the tunnels due to the problem of venting exhaust fumes.

In 1958, the Harvard Square tunnel routes were replaced with
electrically powered trackless trolleys, which were the only such MBTA
routes. A short non-revenue connection from the terminus of the \#71
trackless trolley out of Harvard Square runs to the [Watertown
Carhouse](Watertown_Yard_(MBTA_station) "wikilink") for maintenance. In
the 21st century, with the new Phase 2 [Silver
Line](Silver_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink") in South Boston, trackless trolley
services were extended for the first time in decades.

The old elevated railways proved to be an eyesore, and several sharp
curves following Boston's twisty streets became more problematic because
of severe speed limitations, high maintenance, and noise. The beginning
of the decline of the [Atlantic Avenue
Elevated](Atlantic_Avenue_Elevated "wikilink") line was the [Boston
molasses disaster](Great_Molasses_Flood "wikilink") of 1919, which
interrupted service on the line. After another serious accident in 1928,
the Atlantic Avenue Elevated was partially closed, running as a stub
shuttle. In 1938, it was completely shut down and then demolished for
scrap metal in 1942.

In 1944, passenger service on the [Fairmount
Line](Fairmount_Line "wikilink") was canceled by the [New York, New
Haven and Hartford
Railroad](New_York,_New_Haven_and_Hartford_Railroad "wikilink") after a
long period of declining ridership. As rail passenger service became
increasingly unprofitable, largely due to the increasingly popular
[automobile](automobile "wikilink"), government takeover became
necessary to prevent abandonment of commuter rail services by bankrupt
railroad companies.

### MTA incorporation and takeovers

In 1947, the newly formed Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) purchased
and took over subway, elevated, streetcar, and bus operations from the
[Boston Elevated Railway](Boston_Elevated_Railway "wikilink"). The
original MTA district consisted of 14 cities and towns —
[Arlington](Arlington,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Belmont](Belmont,_Massachusetts "wikilink"), Boston,
[Brookline](Brookline,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Cambridge](Cambridge,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Chelsea](Chelsea,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Everett](Everett,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Malden](Malden,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Medford](Medford,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Milton](Milton,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Newton](Newton,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Revere](Revere,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Somerville](Somerville,_Massachusetts "wikilink"), and
[Watertown](Watertown,_Massachusetts "wikilink").

A state commission headed by Lieutenant Governor [Arthur W.
Coolidge](Arthur_W._Coolidge "wikilink") published in 1947 an ambitious
plan to replace private commuter rail services (which were losing money)
with higher-frequency electric rapid transit that would run roughly out
to what is now the [Massachusetts Route
128](Massachusetts_Route_128 "wikilink") corridor. The goal was to shift
commuters from automobiles and buses and deal with the "intolerable
traffic conditions in downtown Boston". The MTA successfully
implemented a few rapid transit expansions, but progress was slowed as
automobile ownership increased and the [Federal-Aid Highway Act of
1956](Federal-Aid_Highway_Act_of_1956 "wikilink") diverted many
commuters off of mass transit.

Between 1952 and 1954, the Revere Extension (now part of the [Blue
Line](Blue_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink")) opened to
[Wonderland](Wonderland_station "wikilink"), mostly along the former
[narrow-gauge](Narrow-gauge_railway "wikilink") [Boston, Revere Beach
and Lynn Railroad](Boston,_Revere_Beach_and_Lynn_Railroad "wikilink")
right-of-way.

In 1959, MTA streetcar service opened on what is now the Riverside
[Green Line D branch](Green_Line_D_branch "wikilink"), connecting to the
Boylston Street subway and using trackage purchased from the [New York
Central Railroad](New_York_Central_Railroad "wikilink"), which had
stopped running on the line the previous year. The new service required
much more rolling stock than expected, due to heavy ridership.

Also in 1959, with the opening of the [Southeast
Expressway](Interstate_93 "wikilink"), the [New York, New Haven and
Hartford Railroad](New_York,_New_Haven_and_Hartford_Railroad "wikilink")
halted passenger service on the former [Old Colony
Railroad](Old_Colony_Railroad "wikilink") lines. The replacement rapid
transit service did not open [until a dozen years
later](Red_Line_(MBTA)#South_Shore_line "wikilink"), with the service
finally going just beyond [the new Expressway's southern
end](Braintree_Split "wikilink") [nine years
afterward](Red_Line_(MBTA)#Braintree_extension "wikilink").

Meanwhile, the last two streetcar lines running into the [Pleasant
Street Portal](Pleasant_Street_Portal "wikilink") of the [Tremont Street
subway](Tremont_Street_subway "wikilink") were replaced with buses in
1953 and 1962, and the portal has since been covered over by a public
park.

When the MTA reintroduced year-round ferry service to Hull in 1963 (now
[MBTA boat](MBTA_boat "wikilink")), it was the only commuter boat
service in the United States.

## MBTA incorporation

### Formation and commuter rail takeovers

On August 3, 1964, the MBTA succeeded the MTA, with an enlarged service
area of 78 cities and towns. A 79th community
([Maynard](Maynard,_Massachusetts "wikilink")) joined in or before 1972
and left in or after 1976.

The MBTA was formed partly to [subsidize](subsidize "wikilink") existing
commuter rail operations, provided at that time by three private
railroad companies — the [Boston and Maine
Railroad](Boston_and_Maine_Railroad "wikilink"), the [New York Central
Railroad](New_York_Central_Railroad "wikilink") (via the [Boston and
Albany Railroad](Boston_and_Albany_Railroad "wikilink")), and the [New
York, New Haven and Hartford
Railroad](New_York,_New_Haven_and_Hartford_Railroad "wikilink") — with
the B&M running the north-side lines and the NYC and NYNH&H (both merged
into Penn Central in 1968, and taken over by
[Conrail](Conrail "wikilink") in 1976) on the south side. The MBTA soon
began to subsidize the companies, and acquired the lines in stages from
1973 through 1976, but with major cutbacks in service and coverage area.
Since then, many of these lines have seen service return, most notably
the [Old Colony Railroad](Old_Colony_Railroad "wikilink") (NYNH&H) lines
to the [South Shore](South_Shore_(Boston) "wikilink").

By 1964, commuter rail service to Worcester was being provided. In 1965,
the Boston and Maine Railroad started receiving MBTA subsidies for its
commuter service. In 1973, the MBTA bought most of its present-day
commuter rail trackage from the Boston and Maine Railroad and Penn
Central (into which the New York Central Railroad and the New York, New
Haven and Hartford Railroad had merged). It also purchased rolling stock
at this time. Trackage between Framingham and Worcester was not acquired
by the agency, and due to a lack of state subsidy, commuter rail service
on this portion was cut in 1975. Service was resumed in 1994, though the
track was still privately owned until the state purchased it from CSX
Transportation in 2011. The [Fairmount Line](Fairmount_Line "wikilink")
was purchased from Penn Central in 1976. Passenger service resumed there
in 1979 during diversion of other lines during [Southwest
Corridor](Southwest_Corridor_(Boston) "wikilink") construction and was
continued even after the project was complete.

### Bus expansion and streetcar cutbacks

In 1965, the MBTA assigned colors to its four rapid transit lines and
lettered the branches of the Green Line from north to south. However,
shortages of streetcars, among other factors, eventually caused bus
substitution of rail service on two branches of the Green Line. In 1969,
the [A branch](Green_Line_A_branch "wikilink") was replaced by bus
service in its entirety. In 1985, the portion of the [E
branch](Green_Line_E_branch "wikilink") from [Heath
Street](Heath_Street_(MBTA_station) "wikilink") to
[Arborway](Forest_Hills_(MBTA_station) "wikilink") was replaced by
buses.

In 1968, the MBTA purchased bus routes in the outer suburbs to the north
and south, from the [Eastern Massachusetts Street
Railway](Eastern_Massachusetts_Street_Railway "wikilink"). Western
suburban routes were purchased in 1972 from the [Middlesex and Boston
Street Railway](Middlesex_and_Boston_Street_Railway "wikilink"). (Both
of these companies had long since ceased running any streetcar service).
A few routes to the north were taken over from Service Bus Lines in
1975, and one in the south in 1980 from the Brush Hill Transportation
Company. As with the commuter rail system, many of the outlying routes
were dropped soon before or after the takeover, due to low ridership and
high operating costs, and out-of-district communities' refusal to join
or contract with the MBTA.

### Rapid transit expansion

In the 1970s, the MBTA received a boost from the
[BTPR](Boston_Transportation_Planning_Review "wikilink") areawide
re-evaluation of the role of transit relative to highways. Following a
moratorium on major highway construction inside Route 128, numerous
transit lines were planned for expansion by the Voorhees-Skidmore,
Owings and Merrill-ESL consulting team.

The [Charlestown Elevated](Charlestown_Elevated "wikilink"), part of the
[Orange Line](Orange_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink") north of downtown Boston,
was replaced by the *Haymarket North Extension* in 1975.

The *[Braintree extension](Braintree_extension "wikilink")*, a branch of
the Red Line to [Braintree](Braintree_(MBTA_station) "wikilink"), opened
in stages from 1971 to 1980, upgrading an existing rail corridor. The
*[Red Line Northwest
Extension](Red_Line_Northwest_Extension "wikilink")* to
[Alewife](Alewife_(MBTA_station) "wikilink") opened in 1985, with an
intermediate opening in 1984, partly along a railroad corridor and
partly through a newly built deep-bore tunnel.

The southern part of the [Washington Street
Elevated](Washington_Street_Elevated "wikilink") lasted until 1987 when
the [Southwest Corridor](Southwest_Corridor_(Boston) "wikilink") was
opened, rerouting service from discontinued elevated trackage to new
facilities in a parallel existing rail corridor. The closure of the
Washington Street Elevated south of downtown Boston brought the end of
rapid transit service to the
[Roxbury](Roxbury,_Massachusetts "wikilink") neighborhood, which was
eventually replaced with the [Silver
Line](Silver_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink") [bus rapid
transit](bus_rapid_transit "wikilink").

These extensions provided not only additional subway system coverage but
also major [parking](parking "wikilink") structures at several of the
terminal and intermediate stations. For example, the [Route
2](Route_2_(Massachusetts) "wikilink") [freeway](freeway "wikilink")
ends at the [Red Line](Red_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink") terminus,
[Alewife](Alewife_(MBTA_station) "wikilink") station, where there is a
large parking garage operated by the MBTA.

With the 2004 replacement of the [Causeway Street
Elevated](Causeway_Street_Elevated "wikilink") by a subway tunnel
connection, the only remaining [elevated
railways](Rapid_transit "wikilink") are a short portion of the [Red
Line](Red_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink") at
[Charles/MGH](Charles/MGH_(MBTA_station) "wikilink"), and a short
portion of the [Green Line](Green_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink") between
[Science Park](Science_Park_(MBTA_station) "wikilink") and
[Lechmere](Lechmere_(MBTA_station) "wikilink").

## 21st century

### MBTA expansion and the Big Dig

In 1999, the district was expanded further to 175 cities and towns,
adding most communities that were served by or adjacent to Commuter Rail
lines (again including Maynard). The MBTA did not assume responsibility
for local transit service in those communities, some of which run their
own buses, and some of which depend on private bus services.

Prior to July 1, 2000, the MBTA had been automatically reimbursed by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts for all costs above revenue collected (net
cost of service). Beginning on that date, the T was granted a dedicated
revenue stream consisting of amounts assessed on served cities and
towns, along with a dedicated 20% portion of the 5% state [sales
tax](sales_tax "wikilink"). Going forward, the MBTA now would have to
live within this "forward funding" budget.

The Commonwealth assigned to the MBTA responsibility for increasing
public transit to compensate for increased automobile pollution from the
[Big Dig](Big_Dig "wikilink"). The T submerged a nearby portion of the
Green Line and rebuilt [Haymarket](Haymarket_(MBTA_station) "wikilink")
and [North Stations](North_Station "wikilink") during Big Dig
construction. However, these projects have strained the MBTA's limited
resources, since the Big Dig project did not include funding for these
improvements. Since 1988, the MBTA has been the fastest expanding
transit system in the country, even as [Greater
Boston](Greater_Boston "wikilink") has been one of the slowest growing
metropolitan areas in the United States. When, in 2000, the MBTA's
budget became limited, the agency began to run into debt from scheduled
projects and obligatory Big Dig remediation work, which have now given
the MBTA the highest debt of any transit authority in the country. In an
effort to compensate, rates underwent an appreciable hike on January 1,
2007. Increasingly, local advocacy groups are calling on the state to
assume $2.9 billion of the authority's now approximate debt of $9
billion, the interest on which severely limits funds available for
required projects.

In 2006, the creation of the [MetroWest Regional Transit
Authority](MetroWest_Regional_Transit_Authority "wikilink") saw
[Framingham](Framingham,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Natick](Natick,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Weston](Weston,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Sudbury](Sudbury,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Wayland](Wayland,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Marlborough](Marlborough,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Ashland](Ashland,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Sherborn](Sherborn,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Hopkinton](Hopkinton,_Massachusetts "wikilink"),
[Holliston](Holliston,_Massachusetts "wikilink"), and
[Southborough](Southborough,_Massachusetts "wikilink") subtract their
MWRTA assessment from their MBTA assessment. Communities that are also
members of other RTAs such as CATA, MVRTA, LRTA, WRTA,
[GATRA](Greater_Attleboro_Taunton_Regional_Transit_Authority "wikilink"),
and BAT may also subtract their RTA assessment from their MBTA
assessment. The amount of funding the MBTA received remained the same;
the assessment on remaining cities and towns increased but is still
allocated by the same formula. On October 31, 2007, the MBTA
reestablished [commuter rail service to the Greenbush
section](Greenbush_Line "wikilink") of
[Scituate](Scituate,_Massachusetts "wikilink"), the third branch of the
[Old Colony service](Old_Colony_Lines_(MBTA) "wikilink"). Rail
renovation on the [Green Line D branch](Green_Line_D_branch "wikilink")
took place in the summer of 2007. New, low-floor cars on the line
were introduced on December 1, 2008.

In 2008, [Daniel Grabauskas](Daniel_Grabauskas "wikilink"), then the
MBTA General Manager, revealed that the MBTA cut trips from published
train and bus schedules without informing passengers, referred to as
“hidden service cuts”, saying this misrepresentation of service had been
happening for years. Grabauskas said this practice has been ended.

On June 26, 2009, Governor [Deval Patrick](Deval_Patrick "wikilink")
signed a law to place the MBTA along with other state transportation
agencies within the administrative authority of the [Massachusetts
Department of
Transportation](Massachusetts_Department_of_Transportation "wikilink")
(MassDOT), with the MBTA now part of the Mass Transit division
(MassTrans). The 2009 transportation law continued the
MBTA corporate structure and changed the MBTA board membership to the
five Governor-appointed members of the Mass DOT Board.

Rhode Island, which has funded commuter rail service to
[Providence](Providence_(Amtrak_station) "wikilink") since 1988, paid
for extensions of the [Providence/Stoughton
Line](Providence/Stoughton_Line "wikilink") to [T.F. Green
Airport](T.F._Green_Airport_(MBTA_station) "wikilink") in 2010 and
[Wickford Junction](Wickford_Junction_(MBTA_station) "wikilink") in
2012. The [Fairmount Line](Fairmount_Line "wikilink"), located entirely
in the southern reaches of Boston, has been undergoing an improvement
project since 2002. The first new station, [Talbot
Avenue](Talbot_Avenue_station "wikilink"), opened in November 2012.

### Debt concerns, route cutbacks, and fare increases

Claims have been made by the Pioneer Institute that since 1988 the MBTA
has been the fastest expanding transit system in the country, even as
[Greater Boston](Greater_Boston "wikilink") has been the slowest growing
metropolitan area. However, research by the Frontier Group finds
that "no category has the MBTA been the “fastest-growing” of the
nation's largest transit agencies, and in only two categories does it
crack the top 10. However, the MBTA does crack the top 10 in another
category: absolute growth in transit ridership."

When, in 2000, the MBTA's income was capped, the agency began to run up
large debts from already-scheduled projects and obligatory Big Dig
remediation work. As of 2012, the MBTA has the highest debt of any transit
authority in the United States. In an effort to compensate, rates were
hiked on January 1, 2007, from $1.25 up to $2.00 per subway ride with a
[CharlieTicket](CharlieCard "wikilink"), and $1.70 with a
CharlieCard. Increasingly, local advocacy groups are calling on the
state to assume $2.9 billion of the authority's debt, which totals
approximately $9 billion. The interest on this debt is a large
proportion of the MBTA's annual expenses, and severely limits funds
available for any further required projects.

In April 2012, the MBTA Advisory Board approved major fare increases on
all MBTA services, and cutbacks or terminations of some transit routes.
In July 2014, fares were increased further by an average of 5%.

#### T-Radio

On October 10, 2007, the MBTA introduced a pilot program in North,
South, and Airport stations called T-Radio. The program would have been
expanded to pipe in music, light news, weather, entertainment tips, and
eight to ten minutes of commercials each hour to every MBTA subway
station. After the agency received an overwhelming number of
e-mails — 1,800, mostly complaints — it decided to shelve the program on
October 25.

### Major incidents

On May 28, 2008, a westbound trolley on the [Green Line D
branch](Green_Line_D_branch "wikilink") slammed into a stopped train
between the [Waban](Waban_(MBTA_station) "wikilink") and
[Woodland](Woodland_(MBTA_station) "wikilink") stations shortly after 6
p.m. At least seven people were injured, and the operator of the moving
train, Terrese Edmonds, 24, was killed. On May 8, 2009, two Green
Line trolleys collided between [Park
Street](Park_Street_station_(MBTA) "wikilink") and [Government
Center](Government_Center_(MBTA_station) "wikilink") when the driver of
one of them, 24-year-old Aiden Quinn, was [text
messaging](text_messaging "wikilink") his girlfriend. A rule banning
cell phones for operators while driving their bus, train, or streetcar
was put into place days later.

Immediately following the [Boston Marathon
bombing](Boston_Marathon_bombing "wikilink"), the MBTA was partially
shut down and National Guardsmen were deployed in various stations
around the city. During the ensuing manhunt for Dzhokhar and
Tamerlan Tsarnaev the MBTA was fully shut down until the stay-inside
request for Watertown, Newton, Waltham, Cambridge, Belmont, and Boston
was lifted. During the manhunt, MBTA buses were used to ferry police
around the city. After the suspect was caught the MBTA resumed normal
service. The next day the MBTA began displaying "BOSTON STRONG" and "WE
ARE ONE BOSTON" on buses and subway cars, in addition to the destination
that is normally displayed.

### Charlie Baker administration (2015–2023)

#### Crisis and appointment of control board

In February 2015, there was [record breaking snowfall in Boston from the
2014–15 North American
winter](2014–15_North_American_winter#Northeastern_United_States "wikilink")
causing a partial shutdown and severe delays on all [MBTA
subway](MBTA_subway "wikilink") lines, and many long-term
operational and financial problems with the entire MBTA system came
under greater public attention. [Massachusetts
Governor](Governor_of_Massachusetts "wikilink") [Charlie
Baker](Charlie_Baker "wikilink") indicated at the time that he was
reluctant to discuss the financing issues but that he would "have more
to say about that in a couple of weeks."

Following criticism of his emergency management and polling
demonstrating public opinion in favor of his administration prioritizing
resolving the MBTA's issues, Baker announced the formation of a
special advisory panel to diagnose the MBTA's problems and write a
report recommending proposals to address them. The special advisory
panel released its report that April. The report was broadly
critical of MBTA operational and financial management, noting that the
system was in "severe financial distress", was "governed ineffectively",
spent inefficiently, and had a high-absentee workplace culture.
Among other reforms, the report recommended suspending the governance of
the agency by the [MassDOT Board of
Directors](Massachusetts_Department_of_Transportation#Mass_Transit_Division "wikilink");
replacing it with a temporary Fiscal and Management Control Board
directly appointed by the Governor and the leadership of the state
legislature; expanding the existing MassDOT Board; and adding term
limits. The MassDOT Board resigned on Baker's request the following
week. Legislation, which closely followed the report's
recommendations, passed the following July along with the
appointment of the Fiscal and Management Control Board. Baker
also appointed a new MassDOT Board of Directors and proposed a
five-year, $83 million winter resiliency plan.

#### Governance

After initially blaming the snowfall and a lack of public investment in
an aging system for the crisis, MBTA General Manager Beverly Scott
announced her resignation effective April 11. MassDOT Chief
Operating Officer and Highway Division Administrator Frank DePaola was
appointed to fill Scott's position. DePaola retired June 30, 2016,
and was replaced with Brian Shortsleeve. Shortsleeve swapped
positions with Fiscal and Management Control Board vice chair Steve
Poftak on June 30, 2017. Baker launched a search for a permanent
MBTA General Manager in February 2017.

That August, the MBTA named former [General
Electric](General_Electric "wikilink") executive Luis Ramirez to be its
new general manager. Ramirez's previous management experience, as
well as the process for vetting him, came under public scrutiny and
criticism because of a twice-dismissed [class
action](class_action "wikilink") lawsuit during his tenure as CEO of the
[Dallas](Dallas "wikilink")-based Global Power Equipment Group.
Even so, Baker spoke in favor of Ramirez, who began his tenure as
MBTA General Manager on September 12, 2017. Ramirez left the
position effective January 1, 2019, and was replaced by Steve
Poftak. In June 2021, the Fiscal and Management Control Board was
dissolved, and the following month, Baker signed into law a
supplemental budget bill that included a provision creating a permanent
MBTA Board of Directors and Baker appointed the new board the following
October.

Injuries involving a Green Line collision and Back Bay escalator
malfunction, a dragging death on the Red Line, a fatal Commuter Rail
collision with a car, and a death resulting from a fall through a rusty
staircase attracted considerable public attention. In April 2022,
the [Federal Transit
Administration](Federal_Transit_Administration "wikilink") announced in
a letter to general manager Poftak that it would assume an increased
safety oversight role over the MBTA and would conduct a safety
management inspection.

The FTA soon found subway dispatchers working 20-hour shifts due to a
staffing shortage. The MBTA cut rush hour service frequency on the Red,
Blue, and Orange Lines to allow dispatchers and subway supervisors
adequate rest. Federal inspectors also issued emergency directives
concerning runaway trains in yards, and the backlog of track
maintenance, which caused about 10% of the subway system to be under
speed restriction. After an Orange Line train fire endangered
hundreds of passengers and caused one to jump off a bridge into the
[Mystic River](Mystic_River "wikilink"), the MBTA decided to shut down
the entire Orange Line for 30 days to accelerate track work and re-open
with all new subway cars. In December 2022, the Orange Line was
unable to meet even its reduced schedule when about half the trains were
pulled from service without notice to passengers, due to problems with
electrical arcing.

The full FTA safety report released in August 2022 demanded an
increase in staffing and retention of senior employees; collection of,
prioritization of, and decision-making based on safety-related risks,
failures, and precursors; clarification of safety communication-related
procedures for frontline workers; oversight of failures to implement
safety requirements; more resources for formal technical training;
addressing radio dead zones; more independent quality assurance; more
active and independent safety oversight by the [Massachusetts Department
of Public
Utilities](Massachusetts_Department_of_Public_Utilities "wikilink").

#### Service cuts and improvements

In June 2015, the MBTA scaled back the schedule for a one-year pilot
program to expand late-night service on weekends, having expanded it
that February. The program was cut in March 2016. Despite this
setback, improvements were made to service during this time. In October
2015, the MBTA announced that the [Commuter
Rail](MBTA_Commuter_Rail "wikilink") was adding nonstop trips during
peak commute times along the [Framingham/Worcester
Line](Framingham/Worcester_Line "wikilink") between [Back
Bay](Back_Bay_station "wikilink") and [Worcester Union
Stations](Union_Station_(Worcester,_Massachusetts) "wikilink"). In
March 2016, the MBTA reopened [Government Center
Station](Government_Center_station_(MBTA) "wikilink") after two years of
construction upgrades. In September 2016, a month after Baker signed
into law a regulatory framework for [ridesharing
companies](Ridesharing_company "wikilink"), Baker and the MBTA
announced a pilot program partnering the MBTA's [The
Ride](The_Ride_(MBTA) "wikilink") with [Uber](Uber "wikilink") and
[Lyft](Lyft "wikilink") to improve [paratransit](paratransit "wikilink")
services for [disabled](Disability "wikilink") riders, which was
expanded the following February to all users of The Ride.

In December 2016, the MBTA Fiscal and Management Control Board approved
a proposal to replace all [MBTA Red Line](Red_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink")
fleet vehicles by 2025. In January 2017, the MBTA announced that the
new [Boston Landing Station](Boston_Landing_station "wikilink") on the
[Commuter Rail](MBTA_Commuter_Rail "wikilink")'s [Framingham/Worcester
Line](Framingham/Worcester_Line "wikilink") would open the following
May. A groundbreaking for the $38.5 million renovation of [Ruggles
Station](Ruggles_station "wikilink"), in
[Roxbury](Roxbury,_Boston "wikilink"), occurred that August. In
April 2017, the [Federal Transit
Administration](Federal_Transit_Administration "wikilink") approved a
revised cost estimate for the [Green Line
Extension](Green_Line_Extension "wikilink") proposed by the MBTA Fiscal
and Management Control Board and the MassDOT Board of Directors,
allowing the project to be eligible for federal funding. The
Green Line Extension broke ground in
[Somerville](Somerville,_Massachusetts "wikilink") in June of the
following year.

In April 2018, the MBTA began a one-year pilot program for early morning
bus service along certain [MBTA bus](MBTA_bus "wikilink") routes in
[Boston](Boston "wikilink") (which the Fiscal and Management Control
Board voted to make permanent the following December), and the
[MBTA Silver Line](Silver_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink") began operating a
route from [Chelsea](Chelsea_station_(MBTA) "wikilink") to [South
Station](South_Station "wikilink"). In June 2018, the MBTA began a
3-month pilot of a summer weekend [Commuter
Rail](MBTA_Commuter_Rail "wikilink") fare of $10 for unlimited use,
which was subsequently extended another three months. Also in
June 2018, the MBTA announced parking fee changes based on parking lot
usage, and the MBTA released estimates showing that the proposed
[North–South Rail Link](North–South_Rail_Link "wikilink") would cost
between $12.3 billion and $21.5 billion. In January 2019, following
a one-month hiatus, MBTA General Manager Steve Poftak announced that the
[Federal Transit
Administration](Federal_Transit_Administration "wikilink") approved a
six-month extension of the Commuter Rail weekend fare pilot beginning
that month, which the Fiscal and Management Control Board voted to
make permanent the following March.

#### Budget balancing and fares

In August 2015, MBTA officials released revised estimates of the MBTA's
State-of-Good-Repair backlog upwards to $7.3 billion. While MBTA
officials announced the following month that advertising revenue was
running 26 percent higher that year than at the same time the previous
year, the Fiscal and Management Control Board released its first
report. The board report showed that the MBTA's operating expenses and
debt service were growing nearly three times the rate of revenue
growth—being projected to grow from a projected $170 million in fiscal
year 2016 to a projected $427 million by fiscal year 2020 if left
unaddressed—and that operator absences accounted for 69 percent of the
34,347 dropped bus runs and subway trips between January and August of
that year. The Fiscal and Management Control Board voted to
increase fares across the system by an average of 9.3 percent that
March. However, according to an April 2016 estimate, the agency was
losing $42 million per year due to [fare
evasion](fare_evasion "wikilink") (amounting to approximately one-fourth
of the agency's $170 million operating budget deficit in fiscal year
2016). In June 2016, the MBTA Fiscal and Management Control
Board voted unanimously to indefinitely extend a pilot program of
discounted passes for low-income youths and to increase the maximum age
for participation in the program to 25.

In July 2016, after the Fiscal and Management Control Board completed
its first year, Baker addressed the status of MBTA operations and
financial management. There was significant progress, including a
leveling of the MBTA operating expense budget between the 2015 and 2016
fiscal years (after a 5 percent per year increase over the previous 15
years), a 25 percent decline in operator absenteeism, a 30 percent
decline in overtime expenses, a one-third decline in dropped bus runs,
and improvements to system infrastructure. However, at the same
time, Baker noted that the MBTA was "still in very tough shape",
reiterating concerns about the MBTA pension system, the security of
the MBTA's cash-handling operations, need for reform to the MBTA's
procurement and contracting system, and improvements to its
infrastructure maintenance system highlighted in the advisory panel
report. Also in July 2016, Baker signed into law a bill capping
MBTA fare increases to 7 percent once every two years.

In October 2016, the MBTA Fiscal and Management Control Board voted to
outsource the MBTA's cash-handling operations to the security company
[Brink's](Brink's "wikilink") on a $18.7 million, five-year contract, a
decision opposed by unions and elected officials. The MBTA
also extended its existing contract with the Boston Carmen's Union in
December 2016 through 2021 with new wage structures that would reduce
the MBTA's operating budget by $80 million over the subsequent four
years. The following month, the agency outsourced its warehousing
and parts-delivery operations to an external vendor for $28.4 million on
a five-year contract.

In April 2017, the Fiscal and Management Control Board approved a $1.98
billion budget which reduced the MBTA operating budget deficit from $42
million to $30 million. The following month, Baker approved the
Fiscal and Management Control Board's request to exercise the two-year
extension option to continue its governance of the MBTA allowed under
the law that authorized its formation. In July 2017, interim MBTA
General Manager Steve Poftak said that the MBTA would accelerate its
capital spending from an average of $437 million (excluding expansion
projects) in the previous five years to $702 million for fiscal year
2019. Simultaneously, Poftak also noted that the MBTA was "saving
money" by outsourcing "ancillary" operations to vendors.

In November 2017, the MBTA Fiscal and Management Control Board voted to
award a 13-year contract for $723 million to the [Cubic
Corporation](Cubic_Corporation "wikilink") to design, implement, and
operate a new fare collection system for the MBTA by 2020. In
February 2018, MBTA General Manager Luis Ramirez announced to the Fiscal
and Management Control Board that the MBTA would face a $111 million
operating budget deficit for fiscal year 2019. However, that
August, MBTA officials announced that the agency had finished the 2018
fiscal year with a balanced operating budget for the first time in a
decade.

#### COVID-19 pandemic

In February 2020, the [COVID-19 pandemic](COVID-19_pandemic "wikilink")
began to impact Massachusetts. When the stay-at-home advisory was issued
the following month, businesses closed or sent staff to work from home,
and people were advised to avoid riding public transit unless necessary.
At the lowest point, MBTA ridership dropped about 78% on buses, 92% on
the subway, on 71% paratransit, and 97% on commuter rail. Bus and
subway ran on a modified Saturday schedule; commuter rail was on a
reduced schedule and ferries were shut down completely. To facilitate
social distancing from drivers, buses started running fare-free with
rear-door-only boarding, passengers were required to wear face masks
(except small children and people with relevant medical conditions), and
the agency began frequently sanitizing vehicles and stations. Driver
availability was limited as some employees contracted the virus. The T
received $827 million in federal aid for FY2020 and FY2021 to make up
for increased costs and lost revenue.

In June, the MBTA announced that commuter rail tickets and passes valid
as of March 10 would be valid for 90 days, starting on June 22. It also
made various fare changes to encourage riders to shift from potentially
crowded bus or subway, including discounted ten-ride tickets, half-price
tickets for youth, and Zone 1A fares extended to Lynn and River Works
stations.

#### 2021 budget proposal

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic,
[ridership](Patronage_(transportation) "wikilink") on the MBTA has
declined by 87% which has forced Massachusetts legislators and the
MBTA to potentially implement a plan that would eliminate weekend
commuter rail services and shut it down after 9 p.m. on weeknights,
eliminate 25 bus routes, stop subway and bus services at midnight, among
other changes to scale back services. This plan, if implemented through
a vote by the Fiscal and Management Control Board, would save
Massachusetts more than $130 million. The loss in services could
potentially mean that up to 1,700 riders will not be able to take the
bus and 733 riders will not be able to take the train. Supporters of
this plan believe that this is the best plan as the majority of
ridership has decreased due to the pandemic and it is not feasible to
continue providing services that would not be used, especially if there
are alternatives to using [public
transportation](Public_transport "wikilink"), such as personal vehicles.
Through saving money by cutting services, the city is planning on using
the money for services once the pandemic has ended. Supporters
claim that reduced services will still be sufficient for those who still
rely on public transport during the pandemic. Changes would not be
implemented right away, rather, they could slowly be introduced, with
the earliest changes coming in January 2021 and other changes coming as
late as summer 2021. This allows the MBTA to adjust service needs based
on ridership needs. On the other hand, opponents argue that by
reducing services, it will be harder for riders, who are typically
low-income or people of color to get to essential jobs. Riders will be
forced to find other ways of transportation, which could mean using
[personal vehicles](Vehicle "wikilink"), leading to an increase in
dependence on the [automobility paradigm](Paradigm "wikilink").
Opponents argue that public transportation should be treated as a public
good, which means asking wealthier people and corporations to pay their
share for the upkeep of transportation as a way to achieve [mobility
justice](Justice "wikilink").

## See also

-   [Atlantic Avenue Elevated](Atlantic_Avenue_Elevated "wikilink")
-   [Boston Elevated Railway](Boston_Elevated_Railway "wikilink")
-   [Boston Street Railway
    Association](Boston_Street_Railway_Association "wikilink")
-   [Causeway Street Elevated](Causeway_Street_Elevated "wikilink")
-   [Charlestown Elevated](Charlestown_Elevated "wikilink")
-   [Green Line (MBTA)](Green_Line_(MBTA) "wikilink")
-   [Lechmere Viaduct](Lechmere_Viaduct "wikilink")
-   [MBTA kickback schemes](MBTA_kickback_schemes "wikilink")
-   [Trolleybuses in Greater
    Boston](Trolleybuses_in_Greater_Boston "wikilink")
-   [Washington Street Elevated](Washington_Street_Elevated "wikilink")
